Will you think so?
Think so, Iago!
What, To kiss in private?
An unauthorized kiss.
Or to be naked with herfriend in bed
An hour or more, notmeaning any harm?
Naked in bed, Iago, andnot mean harm!
It is hypocrisy againstthe devil:
They that mean virtuously,and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts,and they tempt heaven.
So they do nothing, 'tis avenial slip:
But if I give my wife ahandkerchief--
What then?
Why, then, 'tis hers, mylord; and, being hers,
She may, I think, bestow'ton any man.
She is protectress of herhonour too:
May she give that?
Her honour is an essencethat is not seen;
They have it very oft thathave it not:
But, for thehandkerchief--
By heaven, I would mostgladly have forgot it.
Thou said'st, it comeso'er my memory,
As doth the raven o'er theinfected house,
Boding to all--
he had my handkerchief.
Ay, what of that?
That's not so good now.
What if I had said I hadseen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say-- asknaves be such abroad,
Who having, by their ownimportunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage ofsome mistress,
Convinced or supplied them,well, they cannot choose
But they must blab--
Hath he said any thing?
He hath, my lord; but bewell assured,
No more than he'llunswear.
What hath he said?
Faith, that he did-- Iknow not what he did.
What? What?
Lie--
With her?
With her, on her; what youwill.
Lie with her! Lie on her!
We say lie on her, whenthey belie her.
Lie with her!
Zounds. That's fulsome.
Handkerchief--confessions-- handkerchief!--
To confess, and be hangedfor his labour--
first, to be hanged, andthen to confess.
I tremble at it.
Nature would not investherself in such shadowingpassion
without some instruction.
It is not words thatshakes me thus.
Pish!
Noses, ears, and lips.
Is't possible?
Confess--handkerchief!--O devil!--
Work on, My medicine, work!
Thus credulous fools arecaught;
And many worthy and chastedames even thus,
All guiltless, meetreproach.
What, ho! My lord!
My lord, I say.
Othello.
How now, Cassio.
What's the matter?
My lord is fall'n into anepilepsy:
This is his second fit; hehad one yesterday.
Rub him about the temples.
No, forbear;
The lethargy must have hisquiet course:
If not, he foams at mouthand by and by
Breaks out to savagemadness.
Look he stirs:
Do you withdraw yourself alittle while,
He will recover straight:when he is gone,
I would on great occasionspeak with you.
How is it, general?
Have you not hurt your head?
Dost thou mock me?
I mock thee?
No, by heaven.
Would you would take yourfortune like a man!
A horned man's a monsterand a beast.
There's many a beast thenin a populous city,
And many a civil monster.
Did he confess it?
Good sir, be a man;
Think every bearded fellowthat's but yoked
May draw with you: there'smillions now alive
That nightly lie in thoseimproper beds
Which they dare swearpeculiar: your case is better.
O, 'tis the spite of hell,the fiend's arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in asecure couch,
Oh no, let me know;
And knowing what I am, Iknow what she shall be.
Nay, thou art wise; 'tiscertain.
Stand you awhile apart;
Confine yourself but in apatient list.
While you were hereo'erwhelmed with your grief--
A passion most unsuitingsuch a man--
Cassio came hither: Ishifted him away,
And laid good 'scuse uponyour ecstasy,
Bade him anon return andhere speak with me.
Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, thegibes, the notable scorns,
That dwell in every regionof his face;
For I will make him tellthe tale anew,
Where, how, how oft, howlong ago, and when
He hath, and is again tocope your wife:
Hurry, I say, but mark hisgesture.
Marry, patience;
Or else I shall say youare all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man.
Dost thou know, Iago?
I will be most cunning inmy patience;
But--dost thou hear?--most bloody.
That's not amiss;
Yet keep time in all.
Will you withdraw?
Now will I question Cassioof Bianca,
A housewife that byselling her desires
Buys herself bread andclothes:
it is a creature
That dotes on Cassio; as'tis the strumpet's plague
To beguile many and bebeguiled by one:
He, when he hears of her,cannot restrain
From an excess oflaughter.
Here he comes:
As he shall smile, Othelloshall go mad.
His unbookish jealousymust construe
Poor Cassio's smiles,gestures and light behavior,
Quite in the wrong.
How do you now,lieutenant?
The worser that you giveme the addition
Whose want even kills me.
Ply Desdemona well, andyou are sure on't.
Now, if this suit lay inBianca's dower,
How quickly should youspeed!
Alas, poor caitiff!
I never knew woman loveman so.
Alas, poor rogue!
I think, i' faith, sheloves me.
Do you hear, Cassio?
She gives it out that youshall marry hey:
Do you intend it?
Ha, ha, ha!
I marry her!
What?
A customer!
Prithee, bear some charityto my wit:
don't think it sounwholesome.
The cry goes that youshall marry her.
Prithee, say true.
I am a very villain else.
This is the monkey's owngiving out:
she is persuaded I willmarry her,
out of her own love andflattery,
not out of my promise.
She was here even now; shehaunts me in every place.
I was the other daytalking on the sea-bank
with certain Venetians; andthither comes the bauble,
and, by this hand, she fallsme thus about my neck--
So hangs, and lolls, andweeps upon me;
so hales, and pulls me.
Oh, well, I must leave hercompany.
Before me!
Look, where she comes.
'Tis such another fitchew!
Marry a perfumed one.
What do you mean by thishaunting of me?
Let the devil and his damhaunt you!
What did you mean by thatsame handkerchief
you gave me even now?
I was a fine fool to takeit.
I must take out the wholework?
A likely piece of work,that you should
find it in your chamber, andknow not who left it there!
This is some minx's token,and I must take out the work?
There; give it yourhobby-horse: wheresoeveryou had it,
I'll take out no workon't.
An you'll come to supperto-night, you may;
an you will not,
come when you are nextprepared for.
After her, after her.
'Faith, I must; she'llrail in the street else.
Will you sup there?
'Faith, I intend so.
Well, I may chance to seeyou;
for I would very fainspeak with you.
Prithee, come; will you?
Go to; say no more.
How shall I murder him,Iago?
Did you perceive how helaughed at his vice?
O Iago!
And did you see thehandkerchief?
Was that mine?
Yours by this hand:
and to see how he prizes thefoolish woman your wife!
She gave it him, and hehath given it his whore.
I would have him nineyears a-killing.
A fine woman!
A fair woman! A sweetwoman!
Nay, you must forget that.
Ay, let her rot, andperish, and be damnedto-night;
for she shall not live: no,my heart is turned to stone;
I strike it, and it hurtsmy hand.
O, the world hath not asweeter creature:
she might lie by anemperor's side
and command him tasks.
Nay, that's not your way.
Hang her!
I do but say what she is: sodelicate with her needle:
an admirable musician:
O!
She will sing thesavageness out of a bear:
of so high and plenteouswit and invention--
She's the worse for all this.
Ay, a thousand andthousand times:
and then, of so gentle acondition!
Ay, too gentle.
Nay, that's certain: andyet the pity of it, Iago!
O Iago, the pity of it,Iago!
If you be so fond over heriniquity,
give her patent to offend;If it touch not you,
it comes near nobody.
I chop her into messes:cuckold me!
O, 'tis foul in her.
With mine officer!
That's fouler.
Get me some poison thisnight, Iago.
I'll not expostulate withher,
lest her beauty and bodyunprovide my mind again:
this night, Iago.
Do it not with poison,
strangle her in her bed,
even the bed she hathcontaminated.
Good: the justice of itpleases me:
good, very good.
And for Cassio, let me behis undertaker:
you shall hear more bymidnight.
Excellent good.
What trumpet is that same?
Warrant something fromVenice.
'Tis Lodovico.
This comes from the duke:see, your wife is with him.
God save thee, worthygeneral!
With all my heart, sir.
The duke and senators ofVenice greet you.
I kiss the instrument oftheir pleasures.
What's the news, goodcousin Lodovico?
I am very glad to see you,signior.
Welcome to Cyprus.
I thank you.
How does LieutenantCassio?
Lives, sir.
Cousin, there's fall'nbetween him and my lord
A most unkind breach: butyou shall make all well.
Are you sure of that?
My lord?
'This fail you not to do,as you will--'
He did not call; he's busyin the paper.
Is there division 'twixtthy lord and Cassio?
A most unhappy one: Iwould do much
To atone them, for thelove I bear to Cassio.
Fire and brimstone!
My lord?
Are you wise?
What, is he angry?
May be the letter movedhim;
For, as I think, they docommand him home,
Deputing Cassio in hisgovernment.
By my troth, I am gladon't.
Indeed!
My lord?
I am glad to see you mad.
Why, sweet Othello--
Devil!
I have not deserved this.
My lord, this would not bebelieved in Venice,
Though I should swear Isaw't: 'tis very much:
Make her amends; sheweeps.
O devil, devil!
If that the earth couldteem with woman's tears,
Each drop she falls wouldprove a crocodile.
Out of my sight!
I will not stay to offendyou.
Truly, an obedient lady:
I do beseech yourlordship, call her back.
Mistress!
My lord?
What would you with her,sir?
Who, I, my lord?
Ay; you did wish that Ishould make her turn:
Sir, she can turn, andturn, and yet go on,
And turn again;
and she can weep, sir,weep;
And she's obedient, as yousay, obedient,
Very obedient.
Proceed you in your tears.
Concerning this, sir,--
O well-painted passion!--
I am commanded home.
Get you away; I'll sendfor you anon.
Sir, I obey the mandate,
And will return to Venice.
Hence, avaunt!
Cassio shall have my place.
Sir,
tonight, I do entreat thatwe may sup together:
You are welcome, sir, toCyprus--
Goats and monkeys!
Is this the noble Moorwhom our full senate
Call all in allsufficient?
Is this the nature
Whom passion could notshake?
Whose solid virtue
The shot of accident, nordart of chance,
Could neither graze norpierce?
He is much changed.
Are his wits safe?
Is he not light of brain?
He's that he is: I may notbreathe my censure
What he might be: if whathe might he is not,
I would to heaven he were!
What, strike his wife!
'Faith, that was not sowell; yet would I knew
That stroke would provethe worst!
Is it his use?
Or did the letters workupon his blood,
And new-create this fault?
Alas, alas!
It is not honesty in me tospeak
What I have seen andknown.
You shall observe him,
And his own courses willdenote him so
That I may save my speech:will you go after,
And mark how he continues.
I am sorry that I amdeceived in him.
So you have seen nothingthen?
Nor ever heard, nor everdid suspect.
Yes, you have seen Cassioand she together.
But then I saw no harm,and then I heard
Each syllable that breathmade up between them.
What, did they neverwhisper?
Never, my lord.
Nor send you out o' the way?
Never.
To fetch her fan, her gloves,her mask, nor nothing?
Never, my lord.
That's strange.
I durst, my lord, to wagershe is honest,
Lay down my soul at stake:
if you think other,
Remove your thought; itdoth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have putthis in your head,
Let heaven requite it withthe serpent's curse!
For, if she be not honest,chaste, and true,
There's no man happy; thepurest of their wives
Is foul as slander.
Bid her come hither: go.
She says enough; yet she'sa simple bawd
That cannot say as much.
This is a subtle whore,
A closet lock and key ofvillanous secrets
And yet she'll kneel andpray; I have seen her do't.
My lord, what is yourwill?
I pray you, chuck, comehither.
What is your pleasure?
Let me see your eyes;
Look in my face!
What horrible fancy'sthis?
Some of your function,mistress;
Leave procreants alone andshut the door;
Cough, or cry 'hem,' ifany body come:
Your mystery, yourmystery: nay, dispatch.
Upon my knees, what dothyour speech import?
I understand a fury inyour words.
But not the words.
Why, what art thou?
Your wife, my lord; yourtrue
And loyal wife.
Come, swear it, damnthyself
Lest, like being one ofheaven, the devilsthemselves
Should fear to seize thee:therefore be double damn'd:
Swear thou art honest.
Heaven doth truly know it.
Heaven truly knows thatthou art false as hell.
To whom, my lord?
With whom?
How am I false?
Desdemona!
Away!
Alas the day!
Why do you weep?
Am I the motive of thesetears, my lord?
If haply you my father dosuspect
An instrument of this yourcalling back,
Lay not your blame on me:
If you have lost him,
Why, I have lost him too.
Had it pleased heaven
To try me with affliction;had they rain'd
All kinds of sores andshames on my bare head.
Steep'd me in poverty tothe very lips,
Given to captivity me andmy utmost hopes,
I should have found insome place of my soul
A drop of patience: but,alas, to make me
A fixed figure for thetime of scorn
To point his slow unmovingfinger at!
Yet could I bear that too;well, very well:
But there, where I havegarner'd up my heart,
Where either I must live,or bear no life;
The fountain from thewhich my current runs,
Or else dries up; to bediscarded thence!
Or keep it as a cisternfor foul toads
To knot and gender in!
Turn thy complexion there,
Ay, patience, thou youngand rose-lipp'd cherubin--
Ay, there, look grim ashell!
I hope my noble lordesteems me honest.
O, ay; as summer flies arein the shambles,
That quicken even withblowing.
O thou weed,
Who art so lovely freshand smell'st so sweet
That the sense aches atthee,
would thou hadst ne'erbeen born!
Alas, what ignorant sinhave I committed?
Alack, was this fair paper,this most goodly book,
Made to write 'whore'upon?
What committed!
Committed!
O thou public commoner!
I should make very forgesof my cheeks,
That would to cinders burnup modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds.
What committed!
Heaven stops the nose atit and the moon winks,
The bawdy wind that kissesall it meets
Is hush'd within thehollow mine of earth
And will not hear it.
What committed!
Impudent strumpet!
By heaven, you do mewrong.
Are you not a strumpet?
No, as I am a Christian:
If to preserve this vesselfor my lord
From any other foulunlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet,why, I am none.
What, not a whore?
No, as I shall be saved.
Is't possible?
O, heaven forgive us!
I cry you mercy, then:
I took you for thatcunning whore of Venice
That married with Othello.
You, mistress,
That have the officeopposite Saint Peter,
And keeps the gate ofhell!
You, you, ay, you!
We have done our course;there's money for your pains:
I pray you, turn the keyand keep our counsel.
Alas, what does thisgentleman conceive?
How do you, madam?
How do you, my good lady?
'Faith, half asleep.
Good madam, what's thematter with my lord?
With who?
Why, with my lord, mylady.
Who is thy lord?
He that is yours, sweetlady.
I have none:
do not talk to me, Emilia;
I cannot weep; nor answershave I none,
As I should go by water.
I prithee, tonight
Lay on my bed my weddingsheets: remember;
And call thy husbandhither.
Here's a change indeed!
'Tis meet I should be usedso, very meet.
How have I been behaved,that he should stick
The small'st opinion on mygreat'st abuse?
What is your pleasure,madam?
How is't with you?
I cannot tell.
Those that do teach youngbabes
Do it with gentle meansand easy tasks:
He might have chid me so;for, in good faith,
I am a child to chiding.
What is the matter, lady?
Alas, Iago, my lord hathso bewhored her.
Thrown such despite andheavy terms upon her,
As true hearts cannot bear it.
Am I that name, Iago?
What name, fair lady?
Such as she says my lorddid say I was.
He call'd her whore: abeggar in his drink
Would not have laid suchterms upon his callat.
Why did he so?
I do not know; I am sure Iam none such.
Do not weep, do not weep.
Alas the day!
Hath she forsook so manynoble matches,
Her father and her countryand her friends,
To be call'd whore?
Would it not make one weep?
It is my wretched fortune.
Beshrew him for't!
How comes this trick upon him?
Nay, heaven doth know.
I will be hang'd, if someeternal villain,
Some busy and insinuatingrogue,
Some cogging, cozeningslave, to get some office,
Have not devised thisslander; I'll be hang'd else.
There is no such man; itis impossible.
If any such there be,heaven pardon him!
A halter pardon him!
And hell gnaw his bones!
Why should he call herwhore?
What keeps her company?
What time? What place?What form?
What likelihood?
The Moor's abused by someegregious knave,
Some base notorious knave,some scurvy fellow.
O heaven, that suchcompanions thou'ldst unfold,
And put in every honesthand a whip
To lash the rascals nakedthrough the world
Even to the east to thewest!
Speak within door.
O, fie upon them!
Some such squire he was
That turn'd your wit theseamy side without,
And made you to suspect mewith the Moor.
You are a fool; go to.
O good Iago,
How shall I win my lordagain?
Good friend, go to him; for,by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him.
Here I do kneel:
If e'er my will didtrespass 'gainst his love,
Either in discourse ofthought or actual deed,
Or that mine eyes, mineears, or any sense,
Delighted them in anyother form;
Or that I do not yet, andever did.
And ever will-- though hedo shake me off
To beggarly divorcement--love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me!
Unkindness may do much;
And his unkindness maydefeat my life,
But never taint my love.
I cannot say 'whore:'
It does abhor me now Ispeak the word;
To do the act that mightthe addition earn
Not the world's mass ofvanity could make me.
I pray you, be content;'tis but his humour:
The business of the statedoes him offence,
And he doth chide withyou.
If 'twere no other--
'Tis but so, I warrant.
Hark, how these instrumentssummon you to supper!
Boo, boo, boo, boo.
The messengers of Venicestay the meat;
Go in, and weep not; allthings will be well.
Boo, boo, boo, boo.
Come on.
Doo, roo, doo, roo.
How now, Roderigo!
I do not find that thoudealest justly with me.
What in the contrary?
Every day thou daffest mewith some device, Iago;
and rather, as it seems tome now,
keepest from me allconveniency than suppliest me
with the least advantageof hope.
I will indeed no longerendure it,
nor am I yet persuaded toput up in peace
what already I havefoolishly suffered.
Will you hear me,Roderigo?
'Faith, I've heard toomuch, for your words
and performances are nokin together.
You charge me mostunjustly.
With nought but truth.
I have wasted myself outof my means.
The jewels you've had fromme to deliver to Desdemona
would half have corrupteda votarist:
you've told me she hathreceived them
and returned meexpectations and comforts
of sudden respect andacquaintance, but I find none.
Well; go to; very well.
Very well!
Go to!
I cannot go to, man; nor'tis not very well:
By this hand, I say it isscurvy,
and begin to find myselffobbed in it.
Very well.
I say 'tis not very well.
I will make myself knownto Desdemona:
if she'll return me myjewels,
I'll give over my suit andrepent my unlawfulsolicitation;
if not, assure yourself I willseek satisfaction of you.
You have said now.
Ay, and said nothing
but what I protestintendment of doing.
Why, now I see there'smettle in thee,
and even from this instantto build
a better opinion of theethan ever before.
Give me thy hand,Roderigo: thou hast takenagainst me
a most just exception;
but yet, I protest, I havedealt most directly
in thy affair.
It hath not appeared.
I grant indeed it hath notappeared,
and your suspicion is notwithout wit and judgment.
But, Roderigo, if thouhast that in thee indeed,
which I have greater reasonto suspect now than ever,
why, I mean purpose,
courage, valour, thisnight show it:
if thou the next nightfollowing enjoy notDesdemona,
take me from this worldwith treachery,
devise engines for my life.
Well, what is it?
Is it within reason andcompass?
Sir, there is especialcommission come fromVenice
to depute Cassio inOthello's place.
Is that true?
Why, then Othello andDesdemona return again toVenice.
O, no; he goes into Mauritaniaand taketh away with him
the fair Desdemona, unlesshis abode
be lingered here by someaccident:
whereto none can be sodeterminate
as the removing of Cassio.
How do you mean, removingof him?
Why, by making him uncapableof Othello's place;
knocking out his brains.
And that you would have meto do?
Ay, if you dare do yourselfa profit and a right.
He sups to-night with aharlotry,
and thither will I go tohim:
he knows not yet of hishonorable fortune.
If you will watch hisgoing thence,
which I will fashion tofall out between twelveand one,
you may take him at yourpleasure:
I'll be near by to secondthy attempt,
and he shall fall betweenus.
Come, stand not amazed atit, but go along with me;
I will show you such anecessity in his death
that you will thinkyourself bound to put iton him.
It is now high suppertime,and the night grows to waste:
about it.
I will hear further reasonfor this.
And you shall besatisfied.
I do beseech you, sir,trouble yourself nofurther.
O, pardon me: 'twill do megood to walk.
Madam, good night; Ihumbly thank yourladyship.
Your honour is mostwelcome.
So will you walk?
O--Desdemona--
My lord?
Get you to bed on theinstant; I will bereturned forthwith:
dispatch your attendantthere: look it be done.
I will, my lord.
How goes it now?
He looks gentler than hedid.
He says he will returnincontinent:
He hath commanded me to goto bed,
And bade me to dismissyou.
Dismiss me!
That was his bidding:therefore, good Emilia.
Give me my nightlywearing:
We must not now displeasehim.
I would you had never seenhim!
So would not I my lovedoth so approve him,
That even hisstubbornness, his cheques,his frowns--
Prithee, unpin me-- havegrace and favour in them.
I have laid those sheetsyou bade me on the bed.
All's one.
Good faith, how foolishare our minds!
If I should die beforethee prithee, shroud me
In one of those samesheets.
Oh, come, come you talk.
My mother had a maidcall'd Barbara:
She was in love, and heshe loved proved mad
And did forsake her: shehad a song of 'willow;'
An old thing 'twas, but itexpress'd her fortune,
And she died singing it:
that song to-night
Will not go from my mind;
I have much to do,
But go hang my head all onone side,
And sing it like poorBarbara.
Prithee, dispatch.
Shall I go fetch yournight-gown?
No, no, no, unpin me here.
This Lodovico is a properman.
A very handsome man.
He speaks well.
I know a lady in Venicewould have walked
barefoot to Palestine fora touch of his nether lip.
The poor soul sat sighingby a sycamore tree,
Sing all a green willow:
Sing willow, willow,willow:
Her hand on her bosom, herhead on her knee,
Sing all a green willow.
Sing willow, willow,willow.
The fresh stream ran by her,and murmur'd her moans;
Sing willow, willow,willow;
Her salt tears fell from her,and soften'd the stones;
Lay by these--
Sing all a green willowmust be my garland.
Prithee, hie thee; he'llcome anon--
Let nobody blame him--
No, that's not next.
Hark! Who is't thatknocks?
It's the wind.
I call'd my love false love;and what said he then?
Sing willow, willow, willow;Sing all a green willow.
If I court moe women,you'll couch with moe men!
Sing willow, willow,willow.
So, get thee gone; goodnight
Oh, mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping?
'Tis neither here northere.
Oh, I have heard it saidso.
O, these men, these men!
Dost thou in consciencethink-- tell me, Emilia--
That there be women doabuse their husbands
In such gross kind?
There be some such, noquestion.
Wouldst thou do such adeed for all the world?
Why, would not you?
Nay, by this heavenlylight!
Nor I neither by thisheavenly light;
I might do't as well i'the dark.
Wouldst thou do such adeed for all the world?
The world's a huge thing:it is a great price
For a small vice.
Good troth, I think thouwouldst not.
By my troth, I think Ishould; and undo't when Ihad done it.
Marry, I would not do sucha thing for a joint-ring,
nor for measures of lawn, norfor gowns and petticoats,
nor caps, nor for anypetty exhibition;
but for all the wholeworld--
pity what woman would notmake her husband a cuckold
to make him a monarch?
I should venture purgatoryfor't.
Beshrew me, if I should dosuch a wrong
For the whole world.
Why the wrong is but awrong i' the world:
and having the world foryour labour,
tis a wrong in your ownworld,
and you might quickly makeit right.
I do not believe there isany such woman.
Yes, a dozen; and as manyto the vantage
as would store the worldthey played for.
But I do think it is theirhusbands' faults
If wives do fall: say thatthey slack their duties,
And pour our treasuresinto foreign laps,
Or else break out inpeevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint uponus; or say they strike us,
Or scant our former havingin despite;
Why, we have galls, andthough we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge.
Let husbands know
Their wives have sense likethem: they see and smell
And have their palatesboth for sweet and sour,
As men have.
What is it that they do
When they change us forothers?
Is it sport?
I think it is: and dothaffection breed it?
I think it doth: is'tfrailty that thus errs?
It is so too: and have notwe affections,
Desires for sport, andfrailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well:else let them know,
The ills we do, their illsinstruct us so.
Good night, good night:
God me such uses send,
Not to pick bad from bad,but by bad mend!